
---

# Cryptography

At its core, cryptography is one of the most critical elements that is used and implemented in nearly every system that could be encountered in one's daily life. 

However, before we jump into how encryption is used, it is important to understand the methods for applying the encryption. This will be the first step we will focus on here. 

---

## Basic Cryptography 

Cryptography has a very long history that extends from even before the Roman era, over 2000 years ago. Essentially, since written communication has been used,
various methods of cryptography have been applied to hide the message from plain view so that only the intended recepient is able to read it. It involves creating a message, known as plaintext, then applying some sort of encryption scheme to then produce what is referred to as cipher text, which contains the now hidden message.

---

### ROT13

ROT13 a rotational cipher that uses an alphabet with all letters transposed left or right 13 letters. The below table shows what ROT13 looks like in comparison with the normal flow of the alphabet.

| Plain | A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | Y | X | Z |
|-----------------|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Cipher | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | Y | X | Z | A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M |

An Example of this in practice:
    
    Plaintext: Apple

    Ciphertext: Nccxr

While the characters are rotated and obfuscates the text from immediately being able to tell what the word/phrase is, modern computers renders this form of encryption useless. 


#### ROT13 Lab
Run the `rot13` command in the lab for hands-on practice


---

### Caeser Cipher

As the name hints, this type of cipher is from the Roman era where Julius Caeser used it. While it has a fancy name, it is nothing more than a modified version of the ROT13 cipher.

In essence, all the Caeser Cipher does is modify how far the Alphabet is shifted left or right. This can be just one character or up to 25 characters in a given direction. It is important to note that like the ROT13 cipher, the ***whole*** alphabet needs to be shifted over the given number of characters.

#### Caeser Cipher Lab
To see this in practice, run the `caeser_cipher` command.
